# CSP-SegNet: A Lightweight Attention-based Network for Explainable Joint Optic Cup and Optic Disc Segmentation in Retinal Fundus Images.

## Article Submitted to Neural Computing and Applications (IF=4.5).
## Original code will be available post peer review process and upon receiving a publication decision.

Glaucoma is a critical eye condition that causes permanent blindness by damaging the Optic Nerve Head (ONH). The rise in intraocular pressure damages the ONH, which is tasked to transmit electrical impulses between the eyes and the brain. Early detection of glaucoma in patients is essential to prevent any adverse consequences, but very difficult to diagnose. Ophthalmologists can diagnose glaucoma in patients by conducting morphological analysis of Optic Cup (OC) and Optic Disc (OD) regions in retinal fundus images. In this article, we have proposed CSP-SegNet, a novel Channel-Spatial-Pixel (CSP) attention-integrated lightweight encoder-decoder architecture for the joint semantic segmentation of OC and OD in retinal fundus images. The crux of this work lies in the novel Channel-Spatial-Pixel (CSP) attention module which facilitates enhanced feature representation from different levels of abstraction and faster convergence. The proposed CSP-SegNet is a novel depthwise separable convolutional neural network comprising approximately 1.54M trainable parameters and hence it is highly lightweight compared to other methods. This paper has rigidly analyzed the performance of the proposed deep neural network in contrast to other state-of-the-art segmentation networks, across the REFUGE and ORIGA datasets. The proposed algorithm CSP-SegNet has obtained unprecedented results in performing accurate semantic segmentation of OC and OD on Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) and Intersection over Union (IoU) metrics. The quantitative and qualitative results justify the superiority of CSP-SegNet in terms of generalization ability, segmentation performance and compactness.
